## Preface

In the late 1970s, when I and a small group of students and professors at a school of tropical agriculture in Cárdenas, Tabasco, Mexico, discussed _agroecología_ —a term we thought we had invented—little did we know that agroecology would become a core part of a movement for food-system change. Much has happened in the field of agroecology since those early days, and much of that is reflected in this third edition of _Agroecology_, first published in 1996.

Agroecology has become known for being a science, a practice, and part of a social movement focused on transforming food systems to sustainability. It has also become clear how important it is that all three of these elements be integrated in a transdisciplinary, participatory, and actionoriented way in order to be most effective in bringing about the changes that are urgently needed. We now have the opportunity to move beyond the thinking of the agronomists and technologists who say that by merely increasing yields and profits we will be able to meet the food needs of the world’s growing population. We were being told this when I was teaching at the Colegio Superior de Agricultura Tropical in southern Mexico in the late 1970s and the first Green Revolution was being touted as the technological miracle for agriculture. When we applied our newly emerging ecological focus to the study of these high-yield, high-input systems, it quickly became obvious that they suffered from the same problems that surround industrial agriculture today, with its focus on large-scale monocultures, huge inputs of synthetic chemical fertilizers and pesticides, and a top-down research and extension program designed to “tell farmers what to do.”

Fortunately, around the college and outside the large development projects in southeastern Mexico, there was another agriculture—small-scale, traditional Maya agriculture, with 5000 years of cultural memory. For centuries, the people of the region had developed, tested, and refined practices that continue to evolve today. Featuring the traditional corn–beans–squash intercrop, whole-field _milpa_ agroecosystems, the integration of crops and small livestock, complex crop associations and rotations, agroforestry, and remarkable tropical home garden systems, this traditional agriculture has fed people well for a very long time and appeared to be able to do so indefinitely. Working alongside the _campesino_ farmers who managed these systems, we studied their ecological foundations, and in the process the principles of agroecology were born. At the same time, we begin to solidify our resistance to the Green Revolution model.

When I moved to UC Santa Cruz in 1981 and started the Agroecology Program, another alternative agriculture—organic farming—was just beginning to take off. Organic farming not only embodied the ecological approach we had developed in Mexico, it also served as a good foundation

from which to continue developing resistance to the dominant agricultural paradigm. In the early 1980s, innovative growers were changing their farming systems to organic management, but in most cases they were doing so without much backup research to help them through the three-year transition process required for organic certification, much less help them design and manage organic crops for the long term. Through several years of collaborative farmer-based trials on their farms, we carried out transition studies in crops such as strawberries, apples, cotton, and artichokes, each with its own unique set of issues and challenges. From this experience, we adapted a system developed by Stuart Hill for redesigning food systems for sustainability as a protocol for the agroecological study of such transitional systems. We began with the first three _levels of conversion_ that are described in Chapter 22. We were very successful at the outset with Level 2, where we substituted inputs and practices used in industrial systems with organically accepted ones. But as the limits of a purely substitutive approach were reached— especially when growers wanted to maintain the monoculture design they had worked with before transition—we came to the realization that a total redesign was needed to resist the problems, such as diseases, weeds, and pest insects, that came up at both Level 1 and Level 2. This became the essence for the agroecosystem redesign process that constitutes Level 3 of conversion, which was presented in the first edition of this book and is retained in this new edition.

In the years that followed the release of the first edition of _Agroecology_, it quickly became obvious that for the conversion process to reach sustainability, three levels were not enough. With only these three levels, all of the responsibility was on the farmers and all the effort was concentrated at the farm scale. We also began to observe the cooptation of organic production and markets by large growers and corporations, using their scale and market control to intensify production at Level 2. They rarely considered moving to Level 3. Organic, which in its early years was as much a philosophy as it was a way of growing crops, was being captured by the industrial food system.

I think a key milestone in our thinking in agroecology occurred with the publication in 2003 of an article entitled “Agroecology: The ecology of food systems” in the _Journal_ _of Sustainable Agriculture._ Our team of coauthors, led by Chuck Francis, was particularly concerned with the takeover of organic agriculture, and as a response we had decided to add a Level 4 to the conversion process. This level focused on reuniting the two most important parts of the food system— those who grow the food and those who eat it. These two parts had become so isolated from one another that there was no shared knowledge among consumers about how food was grown, by whom, or where, nor knowledge among farmers about where food went, how it was marketed, and how it was consumed. In describing this level of conversion, we were aware that alternative food networks had developed enough to become a movement resisting the dominance of the industrial food system model, with people beginning to take back their right to food system knowledge, and as my friend Rich Merrill said long ago, to put some _culture_ back into agri _cul-_ _ture_ . When the second edition of _Agroecology_ appeared in 2007, the food system was a central concept, and the reconnection of growers and eaters became Level 4 in the transition process. A chapter was devoted to the alternative food system movement.

Since 2007, agroecology and our knowledge of the complexity of food system issues have grown dramatically. The global food price spikes and food riots that took place around the world in 2008 highlighted the lack of food security and access for many people in the world, which became central issues in a growing food justice movement. At the same, the rapid expansion of genetic engineering in agriculture had many extolling the promises of a “second green revolution,” as corporate control of the food system became evident in everything from the seed to the market. Countering these developments, movements for food sovereignty, local and slow food, smallholder and family farms, and farmer-to-farmer organizations arose and strengthened. It became obvious to me as an agroecologist that we needed to expand the scope of the field beyond the growing and eating of food. We needed to find a political voice, align closely with social movements, and focus on developing a grassroots and community-based alternative food system that could grow outward and eventually make the industrial food system obsolete.

This commitment to social change gelled at about the same time that agroecology began finding new allies and sources of support. Important publications, such as _Agriculture at a Crossroads_ (published by IAASTD in 2009) and _Agroecology and the Right to Food_ (published by the United Nations Special Rapporteur in 2011), proposed agroecology as an alternative approach for resolving the interrelated global problems of hunger, rural poverty, and sustainable development. New agroecology degree programs appeared around the world: at Florida International University in Miami; Universidad de Córdoba in Andalusia, Spain; Universidad de Antioquia in Medellín, Colombia; at several universities in Brazil; and elsewhere—most with a

focus that crosses the normal boundaries between natu ral and social sciences. Farmer organizations such as Via Campesina put forward agroecology as a primary means of creating food sovereignty, opportunity, and justice in farming communities. The science of agroecology found new outlets for its research when the journal publisher agreed to change the name of the _Journal of Sustainable Agriculture_ to _Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems_ beginning in 2013. It was clear to me that we were witnessing the beginning of a paradigm shift with the potential to move the entire food system to a sustainable basis. This would entail fundamental changes in our social, cultural, and economic

systems and institutions—which would go beyond what we had described for Level 4. A fifth level of conversion was needed to complete the transformation of food systems to sustainability, and thus Level 5 features prominently in the final section of this third edition.

As I look back on the 40-plus-year journey I have had in agroecology, I find two personal projects that illustrate how the creation of Level 5 came about. The first began as a group effort among some of my graduate students (listed below), my wife Robbie Jaffe, and me through our work in the coffee-growing communities of Mexico and Central America, which at the time were undergoing the worst price crash in the history of coffee as a commodity crop. We formed the nonprofit network Community Agroecology Network (CAN; described in more detail in Chapter 25), and began working with the growers at Levels 3 and 4 simultaneously. As the network grew to include non-coffee-growing communities, we quickly jumped to Level 5 with programs in food security, food sovereignty, health and nutrition, and youth leadership. Social change became linked with sustainable farming.

The other project was applying the practice of agroecology on our own farm, Condor’s Hope Ranch. By combining agroecology with the traditional dry-farming practice, described in Chapter 6, for wine grapes and olives, our family developed a farming operation that we hope to someday pass on to our children, nieces, nephews, and grandchildren. In the 20 years since beginning the farm, we have dealt with multiple farming practice challenges, but the bigger issues are how a small family operation can compete in the highly corporatized industries of wine and olive oil and how we can encourage our future generations to carry on with the same passion and opportunity that Robbie and I have had. These are Level 5 issues.

Agroecology has matured as a science, is recognized as an important practice, and has aligned with a growing social movement for food system change. Our goal is to develop food systems that meet local and regional food, feed, and fiber needs, conserve and protect natural resources, provide essential environmental services, ensure food security and sovereignty, make food justice a reality, and create the opportunity for present and future generations to enjoy healthy and satisfying lives.

That may sound like a lot for the field of agroecology to take on. But I think you will see how this can happen as you make your way through the book. It begins with a strong ecological foundation for farming practices and ends with all of us thinking about the critical importance of transitioning to a new paradigm for food and agriculture, and what this means for our future.

I conclude this preface by acknowledging and thanking the innumerable people who have helped me form my agroecological vision over these many years. Among those that I value as colleagues are Itziar Aguirre, Miguel Altieri, Francisco Roberto Caporal, José Antonio Costabeber, Joao Carlos Costa Gomes, Bruce Fergeson, Chuck Francis, Roberto Garcia Espinosa, Alba Gonzalez Jácome, Manuel Gonzalez de Molina, Gloria Guzmán, Juan José Jimenez Osornio, Avaz Koocheki, Helda Morales, Jaime Morales, Clara Nichols, Ron Nigh, Ivette Perfecto, Paolo Peterson, Francisco Rosado May, Eduardo Sevilla Guzmán, Vivan Vadakan, John Vandermeer, Graham Woodgate, and the faculty and staff of Environmental Studies at UCSC. I realize there are many others who should appear on this list, and I apologize for any omissions.

I deeply appreciate all that I have learned from a very special group of graduate students who have all truly earned the title of agroecologist: Jan Allison, Nick Babin, Marcus Buchanan, Rose Cohen, Wes Colvin, Ariane de Bremond, Francisco Espinosa, Michelle Glowa, Carlos Guadarrama, Kathy Hilimire, Eric Holt-Gimenez, Robbie Jaffe, Rob Kluson, Leslie Linn, Hillary Melcarek, V. Ernesto Méndez, Carlo Moreno, Joanna Ory, Jim Paulus, Francisco Rosado May, Martha Rosemeyer, Devon Sampson, and Laura Trujillo. Over the years, I have been able to collaborate with a remarkably diverse group of postdoctoral researchers: Gianumberto Accinelli, Belén Cotes, Erle Ellis, Manolis Kabourakis, Rie Mayaura, Eleonora Morganti, Joji Muramoto, Sunita Rao, Jesus Juan Rosales, Anastasia Scotto, Tatiana Sevilla, Koos Steyn, and Roberto Tinoco. I am also deeply indebted to what seems like a multitude of undergraduate students who were the initial stimulus for this textbook. Their passion for food system change and hope for the future helped transform this book into what it has become.

Much appreciation goes to Mike Amato and Catherine Van Sciver at Taylor & Francis Group, and the entire board of editors of _Agroecology and Sustainable Food System_ s, for making the journal the transdisciplinary voice for the science of agroecology. To Ruth and Alf Heller, to whom I dedicate this book, I owe the deepest gratitude for their unending support for agroecology and heartfelt vision for future food

systems. I am honored to have my _compadre en la lucha_, Ricardo Salvador, prepare the foreword for this edition of _Agroecology_ . He has been a model for me of how to integrate education, action, and a willingness to work at the top in the change process. A very special thanks goes to John Sulzycki, senior editor at CRC Press/Taylor & Francis Group, without whose belief in agroecology and deadlines this edition would have been almost impossible to complete. It wasn’t as simple as he thought it would be!

Without a doubt, the person I owe the most for bringing this edition into existence is master editor Eric Engles. The _with_ before his name on the title page has a remarkable story behind it. His capacity for keeping track of details, editing my writing, and shaping ideas, and his insistence that the full story of power and concentration be told, made this book what it is and helped greatly in adding Level 5 to the transformation process that needs to happen for the future of food, agriculture, and our planet.

Finally, I have an accumulated debt of gratitude that I owe my _compañera_ Robbie Jaffe, who has supported this book project from its initial inception in the mid-1990s. Over the past year, while this edition has taken shape, she has patiently (and sometimes not so patiently) given me the space and time I needed. Be it as a skilled environmental educator, as founding executive director of CAN, or as co-farmer at Condor’s Hope, her own commitment to food system change is unsurpassed. As she has shared agroecology with me, we both continue today to share agroecology with our mutual families of four generations, from which our heritage comes and to whom we pass it on.

**Steve Gliessman** _Condor’s Hope Ranch_ _New Cuyama, California_ Author **Stephen R. Gliessman** earned graduate degrees in botany, biology, and plant ecology from the Univer­ sity of California, Santa Barbara, and has accumulated more than 40 years of teaching, research, and production experience in the field of agroecology. His international experiences in tropical and temperate agriculture, small-farm and large-farm systems, traditional and conventional farm management, hands-on and academic activities, nonprofit and business employment, and organic and synthetic chemical farming approaches have provided a unique combination of experiences and perspectives to incorporate into this book. He was the founding director of the University of California, Santa Cruz, Agroecology Program, one of the first formal agroecology programs in the world, and was the Alfred and Ruth Heller Professor of Agroecology in the Department of Environmental Studies at UCSC until his retirement in 2012. He is the cofounder of the nonprofit Community Agroecology Network (CAN) and is currently the president of its board of directors. He is the editor of the international journal _Agroecology and Sustainable Food_ _Systems_ . He dry-farms organic wine grapes and olives with his wife Robbie, son Erin, and daughter-in-law Oriana in northern Santa Barbara County, California.
