## _Section 1_ _Introduction to Agroecology_

As the science of connections among living things, ecology affords a way of looking at agriculture that immediately expands its scope well beyond tilling, sowing, cultivating, harvesting, and marketing. In _agroecology_, we move from a narrow concern with farming practices to the whole universe of interactions among crop plants, soil, soil organisms, insects, insect enemies, environmental conditions, and management actions and beyond that to the effects of farming systems on surrounding natural ecosystems. Expanding this to a global scale, we see agriculture as the most landintensive human activity on the earth, which leads us to consider the overall effects of farming on the ability of the earth to support its populations of humans and other living things. Examining human beings as a particular population, the ecological perspective then encourages us to look into the social world, at such topics as human food consumption patterns, the proportion of farmers to consumers, and the unequal distribution of food.

Casting the net of relevance this broadly leads, we hope, to an integrated perspective in which agriculture can be seen as a key factor—perhaps _the_ key factor—in an intensifying

crisis confronting humankind. Agriculture is not only a major cause of this crisis; it is also an arena full of potential solutions. The most basic goal of this section is to introduce readers to this greatly expanded way of thinking about agriculture.

Chapter 1 describes the many harms to people, soil, resources, and ecosystems brought about by the way we produce food today and discusses how applying ecological concepts and principles to the design and management of systems of food production—the essence of agroecology— can help us produce food more sustainably. In this way, the chapter constructs an overall context for everything we will consider in this text. Chapter 2 then outlines the fundamental concepts, theories, and perspectives that make up the framework of agroecology—thus establishing the foundation of the approach to growing food that we present in Chapter 1 as the alternative to the unsustainable system we have now. With an understanding of the stakes involved in how we humans grow our food and knowledge of the agroecosystem concept, the reader is prepared to explore the many layers of understanding that make up agroecology.

**2** Introduction to Agroecology

**FIGURE S.1** **An intensive vegetable-based agroecosystem on the urban fringe of Shanghai, China.** In systems such as this, food is produced for local markets without much of the fertilizer, pesticides, and machinery characteristic of large-scale, single-crop agroecosystems.
