## chapter 7. Wind

Wind is not always present as a factor of the environment, but it is nevertheless capable of having very significant impacts on agroecosystems. These impacts are a result of wind’s ability to (1) exert a physical force on the plant body, (2) transport particles and materials—such as salt, pollen, soil, seeds, and fungal spores—into and out of agroecosystems, and (3) mix the atmosphere immediately surrounding plants, thus changing its composition, heat-dispersal properties, and effect on plant physiology.

When all these types of effects are taken into consideration, what may seem a relatively simple environmental factor becomes quite complex. Wind can simultaneously have both positive and negative impacts, or be desirable in some instances and undesirable in others. Wind is therefore a chal lenging factor to manage.

**ATMOSPHERIC MOVEMENT**

The earth’s atmosphere is constantly in motion, circulating in ever-changing, complex, and locally variable patterns. This circulation is responsible for moving air masses and driving changes in weather. It is also responsible for creating the surface air movement we experience as wind.

The most basic process driving the atmosphere’s movement is the differential heating and cooling of the earth’s surface. In the equatorial regions, intense heating of the surface and the atmosphere just above it causes the air to expand and rise high into the atmosphere, creating a zone of low pressure. Cooler surface air further away from the equator moves in to take the place of the rising air mass, while high in the atmosphere the heated air moves poleward. In the polar regions, the opposite occurs. Air at the colder poles cools much more rapidly higher in the atmosphere, and descends to the surface, creating a high-pressure zone and the movement of surface air toward the equator.

As a result of the equatorial low-pressure zone and the polar high-pressure zones, large cells of circulation are created in each hemisphere, as shown in Figure 7.1. The flow of air in the equatorial cells and the polar cells creates an additional cell in the temperate region of each hemisphere. As a result, there is a zone of low pressure (rising air) at about 60°N latitude and 60°S latitude, and a zone of high pressure (descending air) at about 30°N and 30°S.

The rotation of the earth alters the flow of these largescale circulation cells. Air currents are deflected to the right of the pressure gradient north of the equator and to the left in the south. This deflection is known as the **Coriolis effect** . At the surface, the end result is winds that tend to blow from

the northeast and southwest in the Northern Hemisphere, and from the southeast and northwest in the Southern Hemisphere. These winds, typical of certain latitudinal bands, are known as the **prevailing winds** . They are shown in Figure 7.2.

Although they describe overall, macro patterns of atmospheric circulation at the surface, the prevailing winds are subject to a great deal of local and seasonal modification. This modification is the result of a number of factors, including the presence of mountain masses on the continents and the temperature gradients created by the differential heating and cooling rates of land and water.

All these factors together result in the formation of large, mobile high-pressure and low-pressure air masses that greatly influence local wind patterns as they move. In the Northern Hemisphere, air circulates around high-pressure cells in a clockwise direction and around low-pressure cells in a counterclockwise direction. In the Southern Hemisphere, the directions are reversed. In both hemispheres, air flows outward from areas of high pressure toward areas of low

pressure.

**LOCAL WINDS**

Winds are also generated by local conditions that have to do with such factors as local topography and proximity to bodies of water. In certain areas these winds are relatively predictable.

In coastal areas in the summer, as well as around large bodies of water such as lakes or reservoirs, daytime winds (called sea or lake breezes) typically blow toward the land because the nearby land mass heats up faster than the body of water. The air above the land heats up, expands, and rises, and then the cooler air over the ocean flows inland to take the place of the rising air. At night the process can reverse as the land mass cools more rapidly than the water, and winds begin to move toward the water.

**Slope winds** are another form of local wind. In areas of mountainous topography, as the land radiates heat back to the atmosphere at night, the air close to the surface cools as well. Since cooler air is heavier, it begins to flow downslope. Such movement is very localized at first, but eventually winds moving down single canyons can join in an entire valley system to create a **mountain wind** . During the day, the opposite effect can occur, and a **valley wind** forms as heating of the valley floor causes warm air to rise upslope.

When large air masses are forced over a mountain range and down onto a plain or valley below, the falling air mass expands. As a result, it heats up and its relative humidity falls.

**79**

**80** Agroecology: The Ecology of Sustainable Food Systems

**FIGURE 7.1** **Latitudinal arrangement of atmospheric circula-** **tion cells.**

Polar easterlies

Polar easterlies

**FIGURE 7.2** **Pattern of prevailing winds.**

This heating and drying process is called **katabatic warm-** **ing** and is responsible for the familiar rain shadow effect. Winds caused by katabatic warming occur commonly in the winter along east-facing slopes of the Sierra Nevada and Rocky Mountain systems when a cyclonic storm system moves inland and pushes air ahead of itself, forcing the air over these mountain ranges. As the air descends down the

eastern or lee side of the mountains, it creates warm winds known as chinooks that can be very gusty and cause rapid melting of snow on the surface. Since the ground usually stays frozen during these rather short-duration winds, plants can suffer considerable damage from desiccation.

A similar kind of wind occurs occasionally during the summer on the coastal slopes of southern California and central Chile. When high-pressure cells form inland, the falling air associated with these cells is pushed over the coastal range mountains and down to the coastal plains below. Called sundowners or Santa Anas, these warm winds can come up quickly at the end of the day, forcing temperatures to rise 10°C–15°C and relative humidity to plummet from near dew point to less than 20%, all in just a few minutes. This is a time of high fire danger, and crops can be damaged by the dry, gusting winds. A similar phenomenon can occur on the Isthmus of Tehuantepec in southern Mexico, where during the dry-season months, high-pressure systems on the western side of the country create hot and dry downslope winds on the eastern side. Called southers or _sures_, these winds accentuate the dryness of the dry-season months.

**DIRECT EFFECTS OF WIND ON PLANTS**

The physical effects of wind on organisms can be of considerable ecological importance. This is especially true in areas prone to more constant wind, such as flat plains, near the edge of the ocean, or in high mountain areas. In general, as with all factors of the environment, the magnitude of the wind’s effect is dependent on its intensity, duration and timing.

**D** **esiccation**

Each stomatal opening in the leaf of a plant leads to an air space in which gas exchange occurs at the surrounding cell wall membranes. This air space is saturated with humidity, and as long as the stomata are open, water vapor from inside the leaf flows out. When there is no air movement, the movement of saturated air outward from the stomata creates

a **boundary layer** of saturated air around the leaf’s surface. Air movement removes this boundary layer, increases transpiration, and increases overall water loss from the plant. The rate of desiccation increases proportionately with wind speed until a wind speed of about 10 km/h, where a maximum rate of loss is reached.

Normal water loss from the plant can be readily replaced by uptake from the roots and subsequent transport to the leaves. But if the rate of desiccation exceeds replacement, wilting can occur. Excessive wilting can seriously affect normal leaf function, especially photosynthesis, leading to slower growth of the entire plant and even death.

**D** **warfing**

There is a direct correlation between wind and shortening of plant stature. The plants in alpine and coastal dune ecosystems are often short because of relatively constant high wind

Wind **81**

velocities. Crop plants that grow in areas with constant wind normally have shorter stature than the same crops planted in areas free of wind. Short stature is the result of constant

desiccation causing smaller cells and a more compact plant. Where winds are more variable, and extensive periods of calm alternate with periods of high wind, plants tend not to be dwarfed.

**D** **eformation**

When winds are both relatively constant and mostly from the same direction, they can permanently alter the growth form of plants. Windbreaks that show bent or deformed plant development are good indicators of a constant prevailing wind. Deformation can take many forms, from a permanent lean away from the wind, to a flag shape or a prostrate habit. Windborne ice is especially effective in contributing to the deformation of vegetation.

**P** **lant** **D** **amage** **and** **U** **prooting**

If excessive winds are relatively unusual events, and especially if they occur during heavy rain or snowfall, wind can cause damage to standing plants. Leaves can be shredded or removed, leaf surfaces can be abraded, branches can be broken off the trunk, tops can be removed, and whole plants can be uprooted. In areas where hurricanes, cyclones, or tornadoes occur, even mature plants that have been growing many years can suffer severe damage. Single tall trees left following selective logging are very prone to wind fall once they lose the protective environment of surrounding trees in a forest. This kind of damage demonstrates the importance of windbreaks (discussed later in this chapter).

In agroecosystems, wind damage occurs most frequently in annual crops nearing maturity, when the plants are top heavy with grain or fruit. This type of damage, where the crop stand is flattened to the ground, is called **lodging** (Figure 7.3). In fruit crops, such as apples or plums, wind can both diminish pollination at the flowering stage and knock fruits off the tree before picking can occur.

**C** **hanges** **in** **the** **C** **omposition** **of**

**A** **ir** **S** **urrounding** **P** **lants**

Apart from desiccation and the physical alteration of plant form, wind can also change the quality of air surrounding plants. The air immediately around an organism is important since it is through the atmospheric medium that gas exchange and heat exchange can take place. The atmosphere directly affects plants by providing the CO 2 used in photosynthesis and the oxygen used for respiration.

Normal air is composed of 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, and 0.03% CO 2 . (The remaining less than 1% is a mixture of water vapor, dust, smoke, pollutants, and other gases.) In the immediate atmosphere surrounding plants, however, levels of oxygen and CO 2 vary considerably since plants produce oxygen and take in CO 2 . During the day oxygen levels close

**FIGURE 7.3** **Lodged corn knocked over by gusty, rain-laden** **winds near Cárdenas, Tabasco, Mexico.**

to plants can rise dramatically, accompanied by a drop in CO 2 as a result of photosynthetic uptake. Plant growth can be slowed if the concentration of CO 2 goes too low, because photosynthesis is limited. Air movement, however, acts to mix the air around plants, disturbing the oxygen-rich boundary layer around leaves and accelerating the diffusion of CO 2 toward the stomata. In this way, wind can actually be beneficial to plants.

**OTHER EFFECTS OF WIND**

Wind impacts individual plants directly, as detailed earlier. But wind has agroecosystem-level effects as well because of its ability to transport materials.

**W** **ind** **E** **rosion**

In any region with low and variable rainfall (or the potential for drought), occasional or frequent high-velocity winds, and high evaporation losses from the soil surface, wind erosion of soil can be a problem. Under such conditions, a loose, dry, smooth, and finely granulated soil surface lacking or partially lacking vegetative cover is easily eroded by wind.

Loss of soil by wind erosion involves two processes: detachment of particles and transport of particles. Wind agitates loose soil particles and eventually lifts and detaches them from the soil aggregates they may have been part of. These particles are then transported in different ways depending on their size and the velocity of the wind. Small soil particles that bounce across the surface, staying within 30 cm of the surface, are transported by a process called **saltation** . Under most conditions, saltation accounts for 50%–70% of the wind movement of soil. The impact of saltating particles makes larger particles roll and slide along the surface, creating **soil creep**, which accounts for 5%–25% of soil movement. The most visible form of transport is when particles the size of fine sand or smaller are moved parallel to the surface and become airborne. Wind turbulence can carry clouds of

**82** Agroecology: The Ecology of Sustainable Food Systems

these airborne particles several kilometers upward into the atmosphere and hundreds of kilometers away to eventually settle or be washed out of the air. Generally, such erosion is about 15% of the total, but in some cases has been known to surpass 40%.

When agriculture is practiced in regions of the world where unprotected soil is subject to wind erosion, great amounts of topsoil can be lost (Nordstrom and Hotta 2004; Smith and Leys 2009). Desertification in the Sahel of Africa was greatly intensified in the 1970s by wind erosion of the soil caused by drought, overgrazing, and intensive cultivation of soils on marginal lands. The giant clouds of windblown soil and dust generated during the great “dust bowl” of the 1930s in the United States are still one of the most graphic examples of the physical impact of wind on farming systems through soil loss.

Soil removal from one place and its deposition in others are dual sides to the wind erosion problem when it occurs. Reduced soil productivity and crop performance are the ultimate results unless appropriate precautions are taken when agriculture is practiced in locations subject to wind erosion.

**T** **ransport** **of** **O** **cean** **S** **alt**

At locations along seacoasts, the physical effect of wind can be combined with the injurious chemical effect of salt deposition. When waves break, bubbles and tiny droplets of salt water are formed and lifted into the air; in the presence of wind, they can be carried inland and the salt they contain deposited on leaf surfaces. Windblown salt and salt spray can burn the edges of leaves and even cause leaf drop (Figure 7.4).

Damage from wind-transported salt can occur many kilometers inland from the coast, but the most damaging effects of salt are seen close to the coastline. Wind storms without

rain cause the most salt damage.

**FIGURE 7.4** **A coastal shrub showing leaf burn and leaf drop** **caused by wind-deposited ocean salt near Paraiso, Tabasco,** **Mexico.** Note the accumulated pruning effect at the left on the part of the plant that is directly exposed to the wind.

The transport and deposition of salt by wind can have a major impact on the zonation of vegetation along the coast, and requires that only salt-tolerant crops be planted in areas subject to deposition. In some locations, natural topographic features along the coast, such as sand dunes, block windblown salt, allowing salt-sensitive crops to be planted on their leeward side. Avocado trees, for example, were once planted in such protected locations along the coast of California from Santa Barbara to San Diego (but more recently such protected areas have become much sought-after locations for residential home construction). Windbreaks may also be used to achieve the same effect.

**T** **ransport** **of** **D** **isease** **and** **P** **est** **O** **rganisms**

Wind serves as a means of transport for a range of organisms that are pests or diseases in agroecosystems. Bacteria and fungi depend on wind to transport spores from infected plants to new hosts, and many insect pest species take advantage of the wind to move long distances in the environment. Several aphids, for example, have a winged stage for dispersal and a wingless stage for development of sedentary pest populations on host plants. The wings of these aphids do not serve for much more than holding the insects aloft while the wind carries them where it may. Of course, if the landing site is an uninfested host plant, a pest problem can develop.

The females of many insect pests, such as the apple codling moth, release a sex pheromone and then depend on wind dispersal of the chemical in order to attract males for mating. The seeds of a large number of unwanted plants or weeds in agroecosystems are dispersed by wind as well. Since small propagules and even small organisms can be lifted hundreds of meters into the air on wind currents and then transported several hundred kilometers away, it is very difficult for farmers to escape the constant “rain” of potential problems. We will deal with the agroecological management of such dispersal problems in Chapter 17.

**B** **eneficial** **E** **ffects** **of** **W** **ind**

Some of the most important beneficial effects of wind take place at the microclimatic level. Internal to the agroecosystem, especially in the canopies of cropping systems, air movement is essential for mixing the atmosphere. Good air circulation maintains optimal gradients of CO 2, disperses excess humidity, and can even increase active gas exchange. Adequately mixed air lowers humidity levels at the leaf surface, thereby reducing the potential for many diseases. In warm climates, wind also has the important effect of enhancing convective and evaporative cooling in the direct sun.

Wind is also required for the production of grain crops such as corn, oats, and wheat. These crop plants are wind pollinated, and depend on wind to distribute pollen from the male structures of plants to the seed-producing female structures of other plants.

Wind **83**

**MODIFYING AND HARNESSING**

**WIND IN AGROECOSYSTEMS**

An understanding of the impacts that wind can have on agroecosystems, as well as the mechanisms of those impacts, gives farmers the opportunity to develop means of both mitigating the negative effects and taking advantage of positive effects. In addition, the energy of wind can be harnessed for an array of uses in agriculture.

**M** **easuring** **W** **ind**

Wind is usually measured with a device known as an anemometer. Cup anemometers consist of three or four horizontally rotating arms with small cups on the ends fixed to a vertical shaft that activates a dial or recorder as it turns. Such

a device will record wind from any horizontal direction, and based on the total revolutions measured, average wind velocity over time can be determined. A fan anemometer can record lower wind speeds more accurately, but has to be pointed in the direction of the wind. Thermal anemometers, which operate on the basis of the relation between ventilation and heat transfer, are used for very low wind speeds that are not recorded well with fan or cup systems. Other types of equipment exist to record wind gusts and wind direction.

Measuring average wind speed and direction is only one part of gaining an understanding of patterns of air movement in an agroecosystem. It is also important to know how local wind patterns are reduced to microclimatic patterns as wind encounters barriers. The barriers can be individual plants, natural topographic variation, or intentionally placed barriers of some kind. Use of such barriers will depend on how they effect the wind we are trying to modify or take advantage of.

**T** **echniques** **for** **M** **odifying** **W** **ind** **P** **atterns**

**and** **M** **itigating** **W** **ind** **E** **ffects**

There are many ways to manage the wind environment in cropping systems. Some are as simple as orienting the planting of rows of a crop in such a way as to funnel a prevailing wind through the crop; others are more dramatic, such as planting windbreaks or shelterbelts, or using intercropping systems that combine wind-sensitive crops with more toler ant ones.

**Windbreaks**

Windbreaks (also known as shelterbelts and hedgerows) are structures—usually made up of trees—that modify wind flow for the purpose of reducing soil erosion by wind, increasing crop yields, protecting the farmstead and other structures, or realizing any combination of these goals. Windbreaks are not meant to stop the wind, but rather to change its course and rate of flow. They are usually oriented perpendicularly to the prevailing wind (if their goal is modification of flow rate) or along the flow angle of the wind (if their goal is redirection). When trees are used to

**FIGURE 7.5** **Windbreak for improving the microclimate of an** **adjacent apple orchard near Lincoln, New Zealand.** This windbreak is made up of willow trees ( _Salix_ sp.).

create permanent windbreaks in agroecosystems, the result is a form of agroforestry (Figure 7.5).

Extensive research has been carried out on windbreak

technology and the role of such structures in cropping systems all over the world (Brandle and Hintz 1988; Brandle et al. 2004; Stigter 2010; Zhao et al. 2013). Windbreaks have been shown to dramatically alter wind flow patterns and velocity, and as a result, to reduce many of the negative impacts of wind described earlier while taking advantage of some of the positive effects. Ultimately, crop plant and animal yields benefit (Figure 7.6).

The primary effect of a windbreak is reduction of wind velocity. A good windbreak can reduce wind velocity as much as 80% for a distance of up to 10 tree heights downwind from the windbreak, and often for a distance as long as 2 tree heights to the windward side. The area in the lee of the barrier is known as the “quiet zone”, a wedge-shaped area of greatly reduced wind speed with moderate turbulence and small eddies. Above the quiet zone and for a distance of several tree heights more downwind, there is a “wake zone” of large eddies, more turbulence, and less reduction in wind speed (Figure 7.7).

**84** Agroecology: The Ecology of Sustainable Food Systems

the eddies. This leads to a quicker recovery of wind speed behind the barrier, and therefore a reduced protected area. A barrier with a porosity of 40% has been shown to reduce wind speed effectively for a distance of 30 heights downwind (Tibke 1988).

Besides reduction of soil erosion, the most tangible effect of windbreaks is enhancement of the final yield of the crop. Higher yield volume is the most obvious gain, but earlier harvest time and better harvest quality are important benefits as well. Less stress in the lee of the barrier allows crops to allocate more energy to vegetative or reproductive growth and less to maintenance. Less physical damage occurs, transpirational losses are minimized, and higher temperatures and humidity contribute to better quantity and quality of production.

**FIGURE 7.6** **Windbreaks in the arid region near Eilat, Israel.** These windbreaks reduce evapotranspirational water loss for the irrigated annual crops grown between them.

Since a windbreak creates an obstacle to the wind, flow is actually deflected upward as it approaches the barrier. Near the top of the windbreak, flow is compressed and accelerated. Just downwind and behind the barrier, flow is reduced to close to zero with a solid windbreak, and to intermediate speeds with a porous barrier. There is a zone of strong velocity shear just above the top of the windbreak that widens and follows the flowline as the air moves downwind, eventually mixing with the air in the zone of turbulence until it returns once again to its normal speed at as much as 20–30 heights to the leeward.

The density and porosity of a windbreak have a significant effect on the distance over which the windbreak can alter wind flow. Denser barriers produce the largest velocity reductions directly to the leeward, but the largest wind shear between the retarded air behind the windbreak and

the accelerated zone above. Denser barriers also create

more turbulence, since kinetic energy loss from the original flow must be balanced by an increase in kinetic energy in

In an extensive review of research on the benefits of windbreaks to field and forage crops around the world, Kort (1988) found that most of these crops show better yields when grown in fields with windbreaks, but that some benefit more than others. A broad-leafed forage crop such as alfalfa, with a high rate of transpirational water loss in the wind, appears to benefit most from a windbreak, and short-cycle grains such as spring wheat and oats benefit the least. Kort’s findings are presented in Table 7.1.

In a review of the influence of windbreaks on vegetable and specialty crops, Baldwin (1988) reports that there is overwhelming evidence to support and illustrate the positive benefits of wind shelter. Yield increases range from 5% to 50% for a variety of crops including beans, sugar beets, tomatoes, potatoes, melons, tobacco, berries, cacao, coffee, cotton, rubber, and okra. Most benefits occur within 10 heights on the leeward side, with maximum benefits seen between 3 and 6 heights. Benefits are also seen within 0–3 heights to windward. An example of how the improved yield caused by a windbreak varies with distance from the windbreak is shown for soybeans in Figure 7.8. With this crop, peak benefit was seen at 4 heights to the leeward; interestingly, however, yields were reduced within a distance of

**FIGURE 7.7** **Wind profiles of a barrier windbreak and filter windbreak.** A filter (permeable) windbreak reduces windspeed more effectively than a barrier (impermeable) windbreak and does so over a greater distance. (Adapted from McNaughton, K.G., _Agri. Ecosyst._ _Environ._, 22/23, 17, 1988 and Guyot, G., Les effets aérodynamiques et microclimatiques des brise-vent et des amenagements régionaux, in: W.S. Reifsnyder and T.O. Darnhofer (Eds.), _Meteorology and Agroforestry_, ICRAF, Nairobi, Kenya, 1989, pp. 485–520.)

Wind **85**

**TABLE 7.1**

**Relative Impacts of Windbreaks on Yields of** **Various Grain and Forage Crops**

**Yield Increase, in Percent, Relative**

**Crop**

**to Fields without Barriers**

Alfalfa 99

Millet 44

Clover 25

Barley 25

Rice 24

Winter wheat 23

Rye 19

Mustard 13

Corn 12

Flax 11

Spring wheat 8

Oats 3

_Source:_ Kort, J., _Agric. Ecosyst. Environ._, 22/23, 165, 1988.

**FIGURE 7.8** **Influence of windbreak protection on soybean** **yield at varying distances from the windbreak.** (Data from Baldwin, C.S. and E.F. Johnston, Windbreaks on the Farm, Report #527, Publications of the Ontario Ministry of Agriculture and Food Provision, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 1984.)

1 height, presumably from either shading, root competition, or allelopathy.

With vegetable and specialty crops, crop quality improvement may be as important a benefit as increased yield. Crop quality can be improved in a variety of ways, including an increase in sugar content in crops such as sugar beets and strawberries, reduced abrasion by windblown sand on crops such as melons, and earlier ripening for most crops. Since vegetable and specialty crops are usually highly susceptible to wind damage and wind abrasion, improvements in crop quality are easily converted into better economic return, which adds to the gains from yield increases.

Windbreaks have also been shown to provide substantial benefits in the production of orchard and vineyard crops (Norton 1988). Year-round protection is critical to the survival and proper development of trees and vines.

Orchard microclimate modification in the form of a windbreak can improve pollination and fruit set, in turn leading to greater yields. Mechanical damage is also reduced, improving fruit quality and economic gain. Proper windbreak design and management can also reduce evaporation, increase the flexibility of the application of pest management materials, and even assist in frost management. Wind-protected temperate fruits such as plums, pears, and grapes show yield increases from 10% to 37%, subtropical fruits such as kiwi, oranges, and lemons show yield increases up to 30% (as well as important gains in fruit quality), and tropical fruits such as bananas show yield gains of at least 15%, primarily due to a reduction in lodging of the mature stems.

**Planting Techniques** An alternative to permanent windbreaks made up of trees or shrubs is the planting of annuals within the field that work to protect the main crop from wind. Corn ( _Zea mays_ ), sunflowers ( _Helianthus annuus_ ), and a range of grain crops such as sorghum ( _Sorghum bicolor_ ) and pearl millet ( _Pennisetum_ _americanum_ ) are examples of annual plants used for this purpose. Such annual barriers have certain advantages over perennial woody shelterbelts in that they are easier, faster, and cheaper to establish, and may allow more flexibility in the farming operations. Like windbreaks, annual barrier plants reduce windspeed, thus improving moisture and temperature conditions for adjacent plants. They are usually planted at the same time as the main crop, often as individual rows interspersed in the main crop. Another technique is to plant the barrier plants (often rye) as a fall covercrop and then to reduce this crop to alternating strips in the spring by tilling when the main crop is planted. Research has shown that barrier porosity of 40%–50% has the best impact on crop yields, and that plants used to form the barrier need to be resistant to lodging, spaced according to the needs of the associated crop and the local wind conditions, and established early enough to give the necessary protection. Because the planting of annual windbreaks is incorporated into the process of planting the primary crop, this technique offers considerable flexibility to the farmer. Minimal time is lost and minimal space is occupied by the barrier.

Sunflowers are frequently used as annual wind barriers to improve crop conditions for tomatoes, broccoli, lettuce, and other annual crops in windy areas of the Salinas Valley of California, and corn is often used to protect strawberry crops from abrasion of the leaves, fruit damage, and reduction of the dispersal of pest mites in coastal areas of central California. Yields of annual crops such as snap beans and fresh market tomatoes have been shown to be improved by as much as 30% with the use of such barriers (Bilbro and Fryrear 1988).

Crop plants themselves can also be planted to make them more resistant to lodging and other forms of wind damage. For crops that are able to produce adventitious roots on the lower stem, deeper planting can help anchor the plant more firmly in the ground. Cruciferous crops such as Brussels sprouts, cabbage, and broccoli benefit greatly when

**86** Agroecology: The Ecology of Sustainable Food Systems

(c) (e)

**FIGURE 7.9** **Soil mounding to reduce lodging in corn (a).** Seeds are planted at the bottoms of furrows (b). After a period of growth (c), the furrows are filled in with soil from between the rows (d). Soil continues to be mounded around the corn plants as they grow (e), creating raised rows in which the corn is firmly anchored. The technique also has the advantages of collecting scarce rainfall for the seed (b) and allowing removal and burial of weeds when the soil between the rows is moved (d, e).

transplanted seedlings are buried deeply enough to cover most of the stem below the cotyledons, allowing the plant to form more roots as it develops. Otherwise, the small seedling with a few leaves can be whipped around like a kite on a string if it is too windy, eventually breaking off at ground level. In windy areas of Mexico, corn seed is often planted deeply in the base of a furrow, so that as the plant develops, soil can be built up around the base of the stem as a part of cultivation for weed control. By the time the crop is almost fully developed, the corn plants appear to be planted on the top of the rows, and as a result of their stronger anchoring in the soil are much more resistant to the lodging that can occur when convective thunderstorms create high-velocity winds (Figure 7.9).

**Timing of Planting** Crop rotations can be used to adjust cropping systems to wind patterns. Crops prone to wind damage can be planted during less-windy seasons (assuming that other conditions are adequate) and followed by wind-tolerant crops. If wind erosion is more of an issue than wind damage to the crop, it might be advisable not to open up an entire field to the wind. Instead, a portion of the field can be planted earlier to one crop, which can then serve as a barrier for strips of crops planted at a later time. Another option for prevention of wind erosion is to grow low-residue crops in protected areas and high-residue crops in more exposed areas of the farm.

**Genetic Varieties Resistant to Wind Effects**

A useful way to prevent lodging in grain crops is to plant a genetic stock that is shorter in stature than usual. Local farmers on the Isthmus of Tehuantepec in southern Mexico, for example, where wind occurs throughout the growing season, have selected for corn with a short stature, thicker stem, and well-developed root system. These local varieties are highly resistant to lodging. One of these varieties, called _tuxpan_, was used as the genetic stock for breeding with improved green revolution varieties to develop shorter, lodging-resistant corn with a higher seed load, as well as to develop varieties more appropriate for harvesting by mechanized combines.

**H** **arnessing** **W** **ind**

We have primarily discussed ways that a farmer can manipulate wind in order to take advantage of its positive effects or to mitigate the negative impacts. But wind has other uses in farming systems that help contribute to the larger goal of sustainability. Harnessing the energy of wind can help reduce external-input and nonrenewable energy use, especially the burning of fossil fuels. This is becoming especially important for small farm systems and farmers in the developing world.

Many methods of harnessing or using the wind are quite simple. For example, the wind can be used to clean seeds of chaff and leaves (winnowing). The wind can also be used for drying. Harvested bean plants can be hung in preparation for thrashing, or fruit such as raisins or apricots can be laid out to be dried by the wind. A light breeze aids considerably in removing the boundary layer of moisture that can form around the plant or plant product.

Finally, windmills have been used to harness wind power for a large range of farming activities, from pumping water to generating electricity for use in farming operations or the farm homestead. Farms in isolated areas, especially in developing countries, where wind is a constant factor, are especially appropriate candidates for the use of wind power.

**W** **ind** **and** **S** **ustainability**

Wind is an important component of climate and weather all over the world. It is also a factor that often has disruptive or damaging impacts on agroecosystems. By learning how to design agroecosystems so they are capable of withstanding and even mitigating the negative aspects of wind, we take steps toward sustainability. But the most important steps will come with the development of design and management strategies that accentuate the very positive role that air in motion can play in agriculture. In some ways, these steps may involve a return to the use of old technologies, such as windbreaks and hedgerows. Nevertheless, there is a critical need to understand the ecological basis for using such practices or strategies. Only then can we develop another measurable

Wind **87**

component of sustainability, and as a result, help establish a more active role for windbreaks, wind turbines, and the management of daily wind patterns in sustainable farming

systems.

**FOOD FOR THOUGHT**

1. In certain cases, an ecological factor may be limit ing in the absence of wind but not limiting when wind is present. What are some examples? 2. The most common argument for not using (or even

removing) windbreaks and shelterbelts is that they take up valuable crop production land. What are the primary counterarguments for this “fencerow to fencerow” farming mentality? 3. Wind is one of those factors that can simultaneously

have negative and positive effects. What are some possible examples of this situation? How would you manage the wind in these examples? 4. What are some of the primary barriers to the broader

use of the free and renewable source of energy contained in wind?

**INTERNET RESOURCES**

Wind Erosion Research Unit of the US Department of Agriculture

www.weru.ksu.edu

Union of Concerned Scientists: Wind Power and Agriculture

www.ucsusa.org/clean_energy/smart-energy-solutions/ increase-renewables/farming-the-wind-wind-power.html

Windbreaks Guide, Ohio Department of Natural Resources

www.dnr.state.oh.us/portals/18/landowner/pdf/wind​ breaks_guide.pdf An extensive, well-illustrated guide to windbreak planting for Midwest farmers.

**RECOMMENDED READING**

Brandle, J. R., L. Hodges, and X. H. Zhou. 2004. Windbreaks in

North American agricultural systems. _Agroforestry Systems_ 61(1): 65–78. Brandle, J. R. and D. L. Hintz (Eds.). 1988. Special issue: Windbreak

technology. _Agriculture, Ecosystems, and Environment_ 22/23: 1–598.

Proceedings of a symposium that brought together experts

from all over the world on the design and use of windbreaks in agriculture. It continues to be a primary windbreak reference.

Burke, S. 2001. _Windbreaks_ . Elsevier Science: New York. This comprehensive book includes both theoretical and prac tical considerations for establishing and utilizing windbreaks. It is written in a way that will be useful to a wide audience, including students, researchers, and farmers. Cleugh, H. A. 1998. Effects of windbreaks on airflow, microclimates

and crop yields. _Agroforestry Systems_ 41(1): 55–84. The mechanisms by which a porous windbreak modifies air flow, microclimates, and hence crop yields are addressed, based upon recent wind tunnel experiments, field observations, and numerical modeling. This paper is thus an update to the excellent reviews in Brandle and Hintz (1988). Coutts, M. P. and J. Grace. 1995. _Wind and Trees_ . Cambridge

University Press: New York. A full review of the ecological and physiological impacts of

wind on trees, and the adaptations trees have developed to withstand these impacts. Geiger, R. 1965. _The Climate near the Ground_ . Harvard University

Press: Cambridge, U.K. The definitive source of information on the formation of

microclimates and how they impact living organisms. Morgan, R. P. C. 2009. _Soil Erosion and Conservation_ . 3rd edn.,

reprinted. Blackwell Publishing: Willingston, VT. A complete review of the processes, control methods, and

conservation programs related to soil erosion, including updated information on the mechanics of and responses to wind erosion.

Moss, A. E. 1940. Effect of wind-driven salt water. _Journal of_

_Forestry_ 38: 421–425. A key research review on how wind and salt combine to form

an important factor in the environment. Nordstrom, K. F. and S. Hotta. 2004. Wind erosion from cropland

in the USA: A review of problems, solutions, and prospects. _Geoderma_ 121(3–4): 157–167. An excellent review of the multiple strategies that can be

employed to reduce or eliminate soil erosion caused by the wind.

Reifsnyner, W. S. and T. O. Darnhofer. 1989. _Meteorology_

_and Agroforestry_ . International Council for Research in Agroforestry: Nairobi, Kenya. A general reference on wind energy and an excellent review

of how trees in agriculture can play important roles in the modification of microclimatological factors and conditions. Shao, Y. 2008. _Physics and Modeling of Wind Erosion_ . 2nd edn.

Springer: New York. A summary of the recent developments in wind erosion

research, providing a key resource for researchers and postgraduate students engaged in wind erosion studies. Topics range from global climate change to air quality and land conservation.

Stigter, K. (Ed.). 2010. _Applied Agrometeorology_ . Springer: New

York.

A comprehensive global review of the management of meteo rological factors in agricultural systems, including wind, with examples of both research and application.
